 
 
SOFTWARE DESIGN DESCRIPTION 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rat Race Game Description 
 
By: Ryan Mendez & An Nguyen 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CPSC 490 
 
 
Professor: Dr. Lidia Morrison 
 
 
Department of Computer Science 
 
 
California State University, Fullerton 
 
Page 1 

Table of Contents 
 
 
1. INTRODUCTION​
1 
 
1.1 Purpose​
2 
 
1.2 Scope​
2 
 
1.3 Overview​
2 
 
2. FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS​
3-6 
 
3. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE​
8 
 
4. UML Diagrams​
9 
 
4.1 Use Case Diagram​
10 
 
4.2 Sequence Diagram                                                                                                                                  11-13 
 
4.3 Activity Diagram                                                                                                                       14-15 
 
4.5 Class Diagram​
   16 
 
 
 
Table of Figures 
 
 
Figure No.​ Name​
Page No. 
 
Figure 3.1​
Client-Server Architecture Diagram…………………………..​
9 
 
Figure 4.1​
Use Case Diagram for Rat Race Escape………………………..​
10 
 
Figure 4.2​
Simplified Class Diagram for Rat Race Escape …………………...​ 11-13 
 
Figure 4.3​
High-Level Game Flow Activity Diagram…………………………..​15 
 
Figure 4.4​
Sequence Diagram for Player Movement and State Update…………………….16 
  
 
 
 
 
Page 2 

1. INTRODUCTION 
 
1.1 Purpose 
The goal of the 'Rat Race Escape' is to deploy a fun, entertaining, and reachable 2D 
asymmetrical multiplayer game. This paper outlines the system requirements and specifications 
of the web application RAT race escape. 
 
1.2 Scope 
The web application will enable the connection of 2-5 players and play a game of cat and mouse 
in real time. The play is centered on one player (the Cat) preying on the rest (the Rats), which in 
turn have to cooperate to find the solution and run. The application does user authentication, 
real-time syncing of the game state, and offers a smooth, browser-based interface, without 
downloads. 
 
1.3 Overview 
The other parts of this paper discuss the functional and non-functional set of requirements in 
creating the Rat Race Escape game. Section 2 describes the functional requirements as viewed 
by the user and Section 3 contains the description of the non-functional requirements. 
 
2. FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
1.  The application will have a starting page. 
●​       Description: Once a user lands on the URL of the game, he/she will see a 
principal menu. 
●​        
Precondition: The customer should possess a valid URL and a compatible 
web browser. 
●​        
Postcondition: The main menu appears with the possibility of choosing 
between the options of:Login,register and settings. 
 
2.  The application will enable creation of an account by a new user. 
●​        
Description: A new user will be able to register with the help of a unique 
username, email, and password. 
●​        Precondition: The email and the username should not be used already. 
Page 3 

●​        
Post condition: A new user account is established and is registered in the 
database. 
 
3.  The application will show a multiplayer game lobby. 
●​        Description: Lobby will display the game rooms available, number of players 
and enable the user to form or join rooms. 
●​        Precondition: The user should have been logged in. 
●​        
Post condition: The user is able to view and participate in available game 
sessions. 
 
4. The app will enable a user to form a new game room. 
●​        Description: A user is able to create a room, and set its parameters such as the 
choice of the map, and the number of players (2-5). 
●​        Precondition: It should be in the lobby of the user. 
●​        Post condition: Another room is created and can be seen by other players in 
the lobby. 
 
5. The app will enable one to join a game room that is already in progress. 
●​        
Description: A user will have the opportunity to choose and be part of an 
available room that is not occupied. 
●​        Conditions: The user should be located in the lobby and the room should have 
a slot available. 
●​        Postcondition The user is added to the player list of the room. 
 
6. The server will automatically initiate the game by having 2-5 players in a room. 
●​        Description: When the minimum number of players (2) is reached, and the 
creator initiates the game, a countdown timer will be started, and then, a game 
session will be launched. 
●​        Condition: There should be 2-5 players in a room. 
●​        Postcondition: The game session begins and all players are changed into the 
game screen. 
 
7. The server will then randomly give one of the players the role of 'Cat' and the other 
players the role of Rats. 
●​        Description: Roles are given fairly by randomly selecting one to play at the 
beginning of each game. 
●​        Precondition: The game session is initiated. 
Page 4 

●​        Postcondition: Everyone knows his or her role. 
 
8. The server will come up with a game map that will contain obstacles, concealed areas, 
and interactive escapes. 
●​        Description: The game world is either procedurally generated or chosen in the 
selection of pre-designed maps. 
●​        Precondition: The game session was initiated. 
●​        
Postcondition: To all clients, a playable map is generated and in its initial 
state is given. 
 
9. The client will send back the game state that is obtained by the server. 
●​        
Description: The client shows the map, all the characters in the game (Cat 
and Rats), and the interactivity. 
●​        
Precondition: The client has been issued with the initial game state by the 
server. 
●​        
Post condition: The player is able to observe the game world, and the 
character. 
 
10. The software will enable the users to transmit movement and action instructions to 
the server. 
●​        Description: The input devices (keyboard/mouse) are used to move players 
and interact with the objects and elements (e.g., levers, doors). 
●​        Precondition: The game is going on and the player has not been killed. 
●​        Postcondition: The action that the player is supposed to take is relayed to the 
game server to process. 
 
11. The server will authenticate any actions of the players and change the state of the 
game. 
●​ Description: The server is the game logic authority, which validates moves, 
collisions, and interactions. 
●​ Precondition: A client has received an action command. 
●​ Postcondition: A game state (e.g. position of player) changed. 
 
12. The server will disseminate the updated game state to all the clients connected to it 
periodically. 
●​ Description: State updates are propagated in the server with a frequency of several 
Hz. 
Page 5 

●​ Precondition: The state of the game has been modified. 
●​ Postcondition: The current game state is given to all clients and reset their view. 
 
13. The catch mechanic will be met in the application when the Cat hits a Rat. 
●​ Description: When the server recognizes a collision between the Cat and a Rat, 
the Rat is taken and eliminated in the round. 
●​ Precondition: The Map has the Cat and a Rat close to one another. 
●​ Post condition: The character of the caught Rat is paralyzed/eliminated and all the 
players are informed. 
 
14. The application will deal with the 'catch' mechanic when the Cat hits a Rat. 
●​        Description: When the server notices that the Cat and a Rat have collided, the 
Rat is picked and eliminated off the round. 
●​        Precondition: There is a close distance between the Cat and a Rat on the map. 
●​        Postcondition: The character of the caught Rat is immobilized/removed and 
all the players are informed. 
 
15. The program will take care of the exit-mechanic when the Rats complete the 
necessary puzzles. 
●​  Description: Rats are required to touch a number of certain objects in a certain 
order or even at the same time to unlock an exit. 
●​        Precondition: The Rats have satisfied the requirements in the puzzle. 
●​        Postcondition: A door of escape is opened and the Rats can use it to win. 
 
16. The application will pronounce the Rats the victors in case they get out of the house 
before the timer is over. 
●​        
Description: The Rats win in case any of the Rats takes the escape route 
which was activated before the time elapses. 
●​        Precondition: A Rat interacts with an escape mechanism that is active. 
●​        Post condition: A game is over, and a result of Rats Win appears. 
 
17. The application will indicate that the Cat was a winner when all the Rats are caught 
before the timer runs out. 
●​        Description: The Cat is a winner when all Rat players are caught before time 
elapses or when the Rats evade. 
●​         Precondition: The population of active Rats is zero. 
Page 6 

●​        Post condition: The game finishes and a result of the game is shown as Cat 
Wins. 
 
18. The app will show the outcomes of the game and update statistics of the players. 
●​        
Description: When a game is over, it will display a summary screen that 
displays the result (win/loss) and player statistics (e.g. wins, losses). 
●​        Precondition: There is a win/loss condition that has been achieved. 
●​        Result: The results are displayed to players, and they are taken back to the 
lobby. 
 
19. The app will enable one to log out. 
●​      Description: An authenticated user is able to terminate his/her session in a 
secure way. 
●​        Prerequisite: The user should be logged-in. 
●​        Postcondition: The session of the user is terminated, and one is redirected to 
the main landing page. 
●​  
 
20. The application will give an audio and custom control menu. 
●​      Description: The user is able to customize the volume of music and sound 
effects and customize control keys (possibly). 
●​        Precondition: The user is either in the main menu or in the lobby. 
●​        Postcondition: Preferences of user are stored and implemented. 
 
 
 
Page 7 

3. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
 
The system follows a client-server model to ensure fair and synchronized gameplay. 
 
Client-Side (Frontend): Built with Phaser.js, HTML, CSS, and JavaScript. Responsible 
for rendering graphics, playing audio, capturing user input, and communicating with the 
server. 
 
Server-Side (Backend): Built with Node.js. Acts as the authoritative host, managing game 
logic, state, player authentication, and room management. 
 
Communication: A persistent, full-duplex WebSocket connection is maintained between 
each client and the server for real-time, low-latency data exchange using JSON messages. 
 
Hosting: The server can be deployed on a dedicated Ubuntu instance or a cloud platform 
like Render. 
 
 
Page 8 

Figure 3.1: Client-Server Architecture Diagram 
 
 
 
 
Page 9 

4. UML DIAGRAMS 
 
Figure 4.1: Use Case Diagram for Rat Race Escape 
 
 
 
 
Page 10 

4.2 Class Diagram (Simplified Core Classes) 
 
Figure 4.2: Simplified Class Diagram for Rat Race Escape 
 
 
 
Page 11 

 
Page 12 

 
 
 
Page 13 

4.3 Activity Diagram (High-Level Game Flow) 
 
Figure 4.3: High-Level Game Flow Activity Diagram 
 
Page 14 

 
Page 15 

 
4.4 Sequence Diagram (Player Movement and State Update) 
 
Figure 4.4: Sequence Diagram for Player Movement and State Update 
 
 
 
 
This sequence ensures that all players see a synchronized view of the game world, with 
the server as the single source of truth. 
 
Page 16 
